---
layout: post
title: "Setting up github pages with jekyll"
date: 2022-09-23
categories: general
---

This is an account of my experience setting up this web site using `github
pages` and `jekyll`.

It is not a tutorial on the subject, but rather a list of what I did, and why.

At first the intention was to have a set of simple pages summarising some of my
projects. The usual github based address <https://fredyouhanaie.github.io> was
sufficient. However, once I took a closer look at the features provided by
github pages and jekyll, it was clear that this combination would also be
suitable for publishing blog posts.

The
[github documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll/about-github-pages-and-jekyll)
provides instructions on various scenarios for creating a web site, depending on
one's needs. This article shows _one particular path_ that covers the following
personal requirements:

* It should cater for use of plain text for all content, so that they can be
  version controlled.

* It should allow use of own domain name with `https` access.

* It should be possible to preview the rendered pages locally before deployment
  to github.

### About github pages and jekyll

* The contents of the web site (github pages) are kept in a git repository that
  is hosted on github.

* Github uses jekyll to generate the static web pages.

* The static web pages are generated from text files (YAML+markdown) that follow
  a specific format, see <https://jekyllrb.com/docs/front-matter/>.

* The html files are generated automatically, through `github actions`, whenever
  new changes are pushed to the repository.

### Creation and the initial setup of the github pages

This was the first step. It was pretty straightforward. I just followed the
instructions [here](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/quickstart).

After the set up and creation of a simple `index.html` file, the web
site was up and running.

### Installing jekyll on a local host (laptop)

`jekyll`, a ruby based application (a `gem`), is needed so that we can update
and preview the web pages locally. The github docs for installing and
configuring jekyll can be found
[here](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll/about-github-pages-and-jekyll)

I already had ruby installed, so it was just a matter of installing jekyll:

    gem install jekyll

I ran the above command as a non-root user (there is no need for root here),
this resulted in the files being installed in:

    $HOME/.local/share/gem/ruby/3.0.0/gems/jekyll-4.2.2

Rather than adding yet another directory to my `$PATH` for the `jekyll` command,
I used a symlink as follows:

    cd $HOME/.local/bin
    ln -sv ../share/gem/ruby/3.0.0/bin/jekyll jekyll

### Creation of the basic web pages

Once jekyll was installed, the site scaffold was created within the local repo
of the github pages:

    jekyll new --skip-bundle .

Next, the `Gemfile` needed customization, as per the github docs, which
consisted of the following two changes:

* comment out the `gem "jekyll" ...` line
* uncomment the `gem "github-pages"` line, and add the version

Once updated, all the necessary packages were installed by running the bundler,
the ruby package/dependency manager:

    bundle config set --local path 'vendor/bundle'
    bundle install

The `bundle config ...` command is to force the downloaded gems to be installed
locally, rather than in the system directories. The command is what was
suggested by the bundler when `bundle install` was run as a non-root user. The
`vendor/` directory is not tracked by git -- a `.gitignore` file was generated
when `jekyll new ...` was run.

Normally, we would run `bundle exec jekyll serve` to generate and preview the
web pages, however, since I am using ruby 3.0.x, I also needed an additional
package:

    bundle add webrick

The above added another entry, `gem "webrick" ...`, to the `Gemfile`. Bundler
was run again for the new gem:

    bundle install

### Local preview of the web site

We are now ready to preview the, currently empty, web site:

    bundle exec jekyll serve

While the server is running, the web site can be viewed at
<http://localhost:4000>. If we modify any of the contents, such as
`index.markdown`, the modification will be reflected in the web page, of course
the browser tab will need a refresh/reload.

### Customization

The main configuration of the web site is kept in the `_config.yml` file. Some
of the initial settings are sample site title and author names and email. These
needed to be changed.

I configured my own title, name, email etc, followed by a restart of the server.

It should be noted that changes to `_config.yml` will only take effect when the
server is restarted.

### Blog posts

Once the web site was operational, the initial base pages, `index.markdown` and
`about.markdown`, were personalized.

Next, it was just a matter of creating the blog posts in the `_posts` directory.

### Setting up my own hostname and https

I wanted the web site to be accessed through my own domain name, `anydata.uk`.
Again, this was achieved on the github web site, following the instructions
[here](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/configuring-a-custom-domain-for-your-github-pages-site/about-custom-domains-and-github-pages)

It required creating two `ANAME` records, `anydata.uk` and `www.anydata.uk`,
through my domain name service provider. Both `ANAME` and `CNAME` records serve
the same purpose, an explanation of the differences can be found on
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CNAME_record#ANAME_record).

When configuring the hostname on Github, a new file, `CNAME`, was created and
committed to the repo by github. Withih the github settings page the box for
`https` was also selected. Naturally, there was a delay before the complete
https based web site was available.

The web site is still accessible through the original github address,
<https://fredyouhanaie.github.io>.

#### Other domain names

I also needed my old hostnames, `anydata.co.uk` and `www.anydata.co.uk`, to
point to the new web site. However, since github only allows one `CNAME` per web
site, this could only be achieved with an html redirection on the original
server.

### The `_drafts` directory and the `drafts` git branch

Jekyll expects the blog articles to be files in the `_posts` directory. It will
also check for articles in the `_drafts` directory, provided that the web pages
are generated with the `--drafts` command line option, for example:

    bundle exec jekyll serve --drafts

This feature combined with a local/private git branch called `drafts` (actually
any name would suffice here) has enabled me to adopt the following process:

1. Take new blog ideas (good or bad) and write them in files in the `_drafts`
   folder
1. Track the changes/revisions made to the files with git (`drafts` branch)
1. Review the rendered pages locally, edit/update as necessary
1. Repeat the above until something worth publishing emerges
1. Copy (not move) the finished article to the `_posts` directory, ready for
   publication

The last step involves creating a new file on the `main` branch, and pushing the
changes to github.

### Epilogue

For anyone considering a similar project, the supporting documentation provided
by Github and Jekyll are pretty good, even for the impatient! The occasional
internet search also helps ;-)

So, what's the point of this article? Well, it provides one specific scenario
for anyone in a similar position. And, more specifically, it has allowed me to
aquaint myself with the toolset :-)

---
