---
layout: post
title: "Spawnfest 2023"
author: "Fred Youhanaie"
description: "Spawnfest 2023"
date: 2024-04-07
categories: general
mathjax: true
---

# Introduction

[Spawnfest](https://spawnfest.org/) is a programming contest for the
Erlang and associated languages. From the
[description](https://spawnfest.org/#about):

> SpawnFest is an annual 48 hour online software development contest
> in which teams from around the world get exactly one weekend to
> create the best BEAM-based applications they can.

My first participation in the contest was in 2017 (December 9-10). At
the time, I used the weekend to kick start the `espace` project. This
was an application that I had been intending to develop for a very
long time. Following the contest, I continued developing and improving
the application. The project is currently hosted on my [GitHub
account](https://github.com/fredyouhanaie/espace).

For the following year, 2018 (Nov. 24-25), I attempted the same plan
for another project idea on my list, `wfnet`. But unfortunately, I was
unable to spend any time on the project during the Saturday. With only
the Sunday available to me, I didn't have enough time to produce
anything presentable, so I aborted my attempt.

Fast forward to 2023, I decided to have another attempt at the `wfnet`
project. During the past five years I've had fresh ideas about how to
go about implementing it. So, I was effectively starting the
implementation from scratch.

At some point I will write a separate technical article about
`wfnet`. In the meantime here is a short summary of the project:

> `wfnet` provides a configuration based workflow enactment engine
> within an Erlang application.

> Here, a workflow is an arrangement of tasks (activities) where each
> task is only activated when, depending on the task type, one or all
> of its predecessor(s) have [successfully] terminated.

> The concept, and implementation, of workflows here follows those
> described on the [Workflow patterns](http://workflowpatterns.com/)
> web site, more specifically the [Basic Control Flow
> Patterns](http://workflowpatterns.com/patterns/control/).

Below is an account of the weekend activities. But, since I left the
writing of the article too late, and I didn't keep a detailed, in fact
any, diary of activities during the weekend, some of the recollections
that follow are going to be vague and blurry `:-(`

---
<br/>
# Preparation

Before the start of the contest, [I thought] I had a fair idea of the
overall architecture of the application, and I would have preferred to
have experimented with one or two alternative designs. However, in
order to comply with the rules of the contest, no code should be
produced, and none was!

This created a challenging situation where I would have wanted to
experiment with some implementation patterns, but I couldn't do so
without breaking the rules. So, as it had been the case with the
previous years, I found myself experimenting with some design choices
during the early part of the weekend.

With hindsight, I could have started with some experimental code
before the contest. However, anything carried over to the submitted
project would need to be clearly marked as pre-contest code, which can
be achieved by attaching a tag to the last pre-contest git commit.

---
<br/>
# The start

For me, the contest started at 1am on Saturday, 00:00 UTC. Not being
as energetic as my younger self, I decided not to start the weekend
with an all-nighter.

I carried out some basic house keeping tasks, before retiring to bed
at 2am-ish:

* The empty repo on GitHub had already been created by the organisers.
* Created the local repo and the corresponding remote branch.
* Generated the basic set of skeleton files, `rebar3 new ...`
* Added some basic text to the `README` file.
* Updated the local repo and pushed it to GitHub.

---
<br/>
# Saturday October 28

I started at about 8:30 in the morning and worked through the day,
stopping for the usual things such as cooking, eating and going for a
walk, as well as making [almost endless] cups of coffee and tea `;-)`

The initial coding activity included a couple of throwaway modules.

The original intention was to create the simplest workflow engine
possible, with minimal feature set and without any of the usual OTP
behaviours, basically a lightweight server. I would then move on to an
additional more elaborate engine, i.e. `gen_server`+`supervisor`,
based on the [OTP Design
Principles](https://www.erlang.org/doc/design_principles/users_guide). Both
designs have their own merits and use cases.

The justification for the simple engine is to cater for very
short-lived workflows where the start up and shutdown of the
supervisor/server processes would be relatively long compared to the
entire workflow run. This is similar to the situations where, for
example, we may maintain temporary key/value data in maps instead of
an ETS table, or in an ETS table instead of opting for a full blown
database server.

During the day I wasn't happy with the way the simple engine was
progressing, so I switched to experimenting with the `gen_server`
based solution. Sometimes creating a simple and effective solution
takes more effort than a more complex one, especially when the complex
solution already has a stable foundation in place that is ready to be
taken advantage of.

In the evening I went for a long walk, had dinner, then continued with
more coding!

This was the last weekend of October, so, as is usual for UK and
Europe, the clocks went back by one hour. I went to bed sometime
before 2am, but I'm not sure if it was on the old time or the new one
`:-()`

By the way, for anyone who considers 2am as late, they should have
seen me in 2017, when I was sitting in bed with my laptop, well past
3am, and trying to get my head around the `ETS` matchspec expressions
`:-(`

---
<br/>
# Sunday October 29

After a good night's rest I was ready for some more coding in the
morning.

Originally, I was going to submit both engine types and throughout the
morning I continued going back and forth between the simple engine and
the `gen_server` one.

It soon became clear that there was only enough time for one type, so
I eventually settled for the `gen_server`. Simply because it already
comes with the API for the workflow clients and the facilities for
maintaining the application state.

Committing to the `gen_server` variant enabled me to focus better. It
was then a matter of scribbling on the whiteboard and transcribing the
pseudo code from the whiteboard into the emacs editor. Eventually, I
got a working application -- for some definition of working `;-)`

During the last hour of the contest I switched my efforts to updating
the documentation and the `README` file. Judging by the traffic on
the Slack channel, the other contestants were also busy updating their
project documentation!

The last commit was at 23:41 UTC. This was followed by a nice cool
beer from the fridge, feet up, and watched the highlights of the F1
Mexico GP `:-)`

---
<br/>
# Post-Spawnfest

The `wfnet` project now has a new
[home](https://github.com/fredyouhanaie/wfnet) in my personal
repository.

For me, the Spawnfest weekend is an opportunity to kick start an idea
that may have been sitting on a todo list for a while. The pressure of
the deadline is a good incentive for putting all the _nonessential
distractions_ on hold for the duration of the weekend. It has helped
me produce a _good enough_ baseline application for further
incremental development later, as and when time permits.

For anyone who has a project idea in need of a kick start, the
Spawnfest weekend is a good opportunity to help them along. Of course,
assuming the project is based on Erlang or one of the BEAM related
languages.

The [results of the contest](https://spawnfest.org/2023.html) are
out. I was hoping to publish this article before the announcement,
then follow it up with an update. My submission has been awarded the
second place in the _correctness category_. This is a very pleasant
surprise `:-)` I have also received very helpful comments from the
judges, as has been the case on my previous attempts. When I get a
chance I'll post a short wrap up article.

---
<br/>
# Acknowledgements

It is very important to acknowledge the efforts of the
[organisers](https://spawnfest.org/#organizers), [Paulo
F. Oliveira](https://github.com/paulo-ferraz-oliveira) and [Bryan
Paxton](https://github.com/starbelly), and [the
judges](https://spawnfest.org/#judges) who have volunteered their time
with no rewards, financial or otherwise, in return. They have done
this on top of their normal daily work and family activity.

Just as importantly, [the sponsors](https://spawnfest.org/#sponsors)
have always played a big role in supporting the contest.  The first
edition of the contest was in 2011 and, with the exception of
2013-2016, it has run every year since then. Throughout, there has
always been support from the community in the form of sponsorship. You
can see the list of the sponsors for each edition by following the
relevant links for the corresponding years on the
["about"](https://spawnfest.org/#about) page of the Spawnfest web
site.

---
